website/versioned_docs/version-0.14/01-language-basics/14-slices.mdx, before:

import CodeBlock from "@theme/CodeBlock";

import Slices from "!!raw-loader!./14.slices.zig";
import Slices2 from "!!raw-loader!./14.slices-2.zig";

# Slices

Slices can be thought of as a pair of `[*]T` (the pointer to the data) and a
`usize` (the element count). Their syntax is `[]T`, with `T` being the child
type. Slices are used heavily throughout Zig for when you need to operate on
arbitrary amounts of data. Slices have the same attributes as pointers, meaning
that const slices also exist. `for` loops also operate over slices. String
literals in Zig coerce to `[]const u8`.

Here, the syntax `x[n..m]` is used to create a slice from an array. This is
called **slicing**, and creates a slice of the elements starting at `x[n]` and
ending at `x[m - 1]`. This example uses a const slice, as the values
pointed by the slice do not need to be modified.

<CodeBlock language="zig">{Slices}</CodeBlock>

When these `n` and `m` values are both known at compile time, slicing will
actually produce a pointer to an array. This is not an issue as a pointer to an
array i.e. `*[N]T` will coerce to a `[]T`.

<CodeBlock language="zig">{Slices2}</CodeBlock>

The syntax `x[n..]` can also be used when you want to slice to the end.

```zig
test "slices 3" {
    var array = [_]u8{ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };
    var slice = array[0..];
    _ = slice;
}
```

Types that may be sliced are arrays, many pointers and slices.

:::info
We can now apply our knowledge and [make another program together](/posts/fahrenheit-to-celsius).

:::

Commit message:

rework many-item pointers / improve slicing

website/versioned_docs/version-0.14/01-language-basics/14-slices.mdx, after:

import CodeBlock from "@theme/CodeBlock";

import Slices from "!!raw-loader!./14.slices.zig";
import Slices2 from "!!raw-loader!./14.slices-2.zig";

# Slices

Slices can be thought of many-item pointers (`[*]T`) with a length (`usize`).
These use the syntax `[]T`. Slices are easier to use safely and more convinient
than many-item pointers, as they store the valid length of the buffer with them.
Slices are sometimes referred to as "fat pointers" as they're typically double
the size of a normal pointer. Slices are the most common way to pass around
buffers in Zig.

Unlike many-item pointers, `for` loops work on slices.

The syntax `x[n..m]` is used to create a slice from an array, an operation known
as **slicing**. This creates a "slice" - a view into the array consisting of a
pointer and a length - spanning the elements from `x[n]` to `x[m - 1]`. In this
example, a `const` slice is used as the elements don't need to be modified.

<CodeBlock language="zig">{Slices}</CodeBlock>

When these `n` and `m` values are both known at compile time, slicing will
actually produce a pointer to an array. This is not an issue as a pointer to an
array i.e. `*[N]T` will coerce to a slice - `[]T`.

<CodeBlock language="zig">{Slices2}</CodeBlock>

The syntax `x[n..]` can also be used when you want to slice to the end.

```zig
test "slices 3" {
    var array = [_]u8{ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };
    var slice = array[0..];
    _ = slice;
}
```

Let's again compare our pointer types.

| Feature         | `*T`              | `*[N]T`            | `[*]T`                           | `[]T`               |
| --------------- | ----------------- | ------------------ | -------------------------------- | ------------------- |
| Dereferenceable | Yes, e.g. `ptr.*` | No                 | No                               | No                  |
| Indexable       | No                | Yes                | Yes                              | Yes                 |
| Sliceable       | No                | Yes                | Yes                              | Yes                 |
| Element Count   | Always 1          | Compile-time known | Unknown                          | Runtime known       |
| Arithmetic      | No                | No                 | Yes, e.g. `ptr + 1` or `ptr - 1` | No                  |
| Size            | @sizeOf(usize)    | @sizeOf(usize)     | @sizeOf(usize)                   | @sizeOf(usize) \* 2 |
| Attributes      | Yes               | Yes                | Yes                              | Yes                 |

:::info
We can now apply our knowledge and [make another program together](/posts/fahrenheit-to-celsius).

:::
