website/versioned_docs/version-0.13/00-getting-started/02-installation.mdx, before:

---
description: Installation instructions for the Zig programming language on Linux, Windows, and macOS.
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

# Installation

<Tabs
    defaultValue="linux"
    values={[
        {label: 'Linux', value: 'linux'},
        {label: 'Windows', value: 'windows'},
        {label: 'macOS', value: 'macos'},
    ]}>
    <TabItem value="linux">
    Consider getting Zig from your distribution's [package manager](https://github.com/ziglang/zig/wiki/Install-Zig-from-a-Package-Manager). Most major linux distros package the latest Zig release.

    ### Installing manually

    1. [Download](https://ziglang.org/download/#release-0.13.0) a prebuilt version of Zig.

        Choose a build of Zig 0.13 for Linux that matches your CPU architecture. If you're unsure which architecture you're using, this can be found with:

        ```bash
        uname -m
        ```

    2. Extract the archive using tar, e.g.

        ```bash
        tar xf zig-linux-x86_64-0.13.0.tar.xz
        ```

    3. Add the location of your Zig binary to your path, e.g.

        ```bash
        echo 'export PATH="$HOME/zig-linux-x86_64-0.13.0:$PATH"' >> ~/.bashrc
        ```
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="windows">
    Consider getting Zig from a package manager such as [chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org/), [scoop](https://scoop.sh/), or [winget](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/package-manager/winget/#install-winget).

    All commands shown are to be used inside Powershell.

    ```powershell
    choco install zig
    ```
    ```
    winget install zig.zig
    ```
    ```
    scoop install zig
    ```

    ### Installing manually

    1. [Download](https://ziglang.org/download/#release-0.13.0) a prebuilt version of Zig.

        Choose a build of Zig 0.13 for Windows that matches your CPU architecture. Most Windows systems use `x86_64`, also known as `AMD64`. If you're unsure which architecture you're using, this can be found with:

        ```powershell
        $Env:PROCESSOR_ARCHITECTURE
        ```

    2. Extract Zig.

    3. Add Zig to your path:

        <Tabs
        defaultValue="user"
        values={[
            {label: 'Current User', value: 'user'},
            {label: 'System Wide', value: 'system'},
        ]}>
        <TabItem value="user">

        ```powershell
        [Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable(
            "Path",
            [Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path", "User") + ";C:\_\zig-windows-_",
            "User"
        )
        ```
        </TabItem>

        <TabItem value="system">

        ```powershell
        [Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable(
            "Path",
            [Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path", "Machine") + ";C:\_\zig-windows-_",
            "Machine"
        )
        ```
        </TabItem>
        </Tabs>

        Close your terminal and create a new one.


    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="macos">
    Consider getting Zig from a package manager such as [brew](https://brew.sh/).

    ```
    brew install zig
    ```
    </TabItem>

</Tabs>

### Verifying your install

Verify your installation with `zig version`. The output should look like this:

```
$ zig version
0.13.0
```

### Extras

For completions and go-to-definition in your editor, consider installing the [Zig Language Server](https://github.com/zigtools/zls/#installation).

Consider joining a [Zig community](https://github.com/ziglang/zig/wiki/Community).

Commit message:

"Apply the changes to current session" added

website/versioned_docs/version-0.13/00-getting-started/02-installation.mdx, after:

---
description: Installation instructions for the Zig programming language on Linux, Windows, and macOS.
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

# Installation

<Tabs
    defaultValue="linux"
    values={[
        {label: 'Linux', value: 'linux'},
        {label: 'Windows', value: 'windows'},
        {label: 'macOS', value: 'macos'},
    ]}>
    <TabItem value="linux">
    Consider getting Zig from your distribution's [package manager](https://github.com/ziglang/zig/wiki/Install-Zig-from-a-Package-Manager). Most major linux distros package the latest Zig release.

    ### Installing manually

    1. [Download](https://ziglang.org/download/#release-0.13.0) a prebuilt version of Zig.

        Choose a build of Zig 0.13 for Linux that matches your CPU architecture. If you're unsure which architecture you're using, this can be found with:

        ```bash
        uname -m
        ```

    2. Extract the archive using tar, e.g.

        ```bash
        tar xf zig-linux-x86_64-0.13.0.tar.xz
        ```

    3. Add the location of your Zig binary to your path, e.g.

        ```bash
        echo 'export PATH="$HOME/zig-linux-x86_64-0.13.0:$PATH"' >> ~/.bashrc
        ```
    4. Apply the changes to current session:

        ```bash
        source ~/.bashrc
        ```
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="windows">
    Consider getting Zig from a package manager such as [chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org/), [scoop](https://scoop.sh/), or [winget](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/package-manager/winget/#install-winget).

    All commands shown are to be used inside Powershell.

    ```powershell
    choco install zig
    ```
    ```
    winget install zig.zig
    ```
    ```
    scoop install zig
    ```

    ### Installing manually

    1. [Download](https://ziglang.org/download/#release-0.13.0) a prebuilt version of Zig.

        Choose a build of Zig 0.13 for Windows that matches your CPU architecture. Most Windows systems use `x86_64`, also known as `AMD64`. If you're unsure which architecture you're using, this can be found with:

        ```powershell
        $Env:PROCESSOR_ARCHITECTURE
        ```

    2. Extract Zig.

    3. Add Zig to your path:

        <Tabs
        defaultValue="user"
        values={[
            {label: 'Current User', value: 'user'},
            {label: 'System Wide', value: 'system'},
        ]}>
        <TabItem value="user">

        ```powershell
        [Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable(
            "Path",
            [Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path", "User") + ";C:\_\zig-windows-_",
            "User"
        )
        ```
        </TabItem>

        <TabItem value="system">

        ```powershell
        [Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable(
            "Path",
            [Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path", "Machine") + ";C:\_\zig-windows-_",
            "Machine"
        )
        ```
        </TabItem>
        </Tabs>

        Close your terminal and create a new one.


    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="macos">
    Consider getting Zig from a package manager such as [brew](https://brew.sh/).

    ```
    brew install zig
    ```
    </TabItem>

</Tabs>

### Verifying your install

Verify your installation with `zig version`. The output should look like this:

```
$ zig version
0.13.0
```

### Extras

For completions and go-to-definition in your editor, consider installing the [Zig Language Server](https://github.com/zigtools/zls/#installation).

Consider joining a [Zig community](https://github.com/ziglang/zig/wiki/Community).
