website/versioned_docs/version-0.13/00-getting-started/04-running-tests.mdx, before:

---
pagination_next: language-basics/assignment
---

import CodeBlock from "@theme/CodeBlock";

import Success from "!!raw-loader!./04.running-tests-success.zig";

# Running Tests

In this guide, code examples are often given as runnable tests. Before proceeding, make sure that you can run them successfully.

### Success

Save the following text as `test_pass.zig`, and run `zig test test_pass.zig`; you should read `All 1 tests  passed.` in your terminal.

<CodeBlock language="zig">{Success}</CodeBlock>

:::note

Some code examples in this guide will have their imports at the top hidden, make sure to get them by clicking the copy button on the top-right of the code block.

:::

### Failure

Now, save the following text as `test_fail.zig` and observe it fail.

```zig
const std = @import("std");
const expect = std.testing.expect;

test "always fails" {
    try expect(false);
}
```

Which should output something like:

```
Test [1/1] test.always fails... FAIL (TestUnexpectedResult)
/usr/lib/zig/std/testing.zig:515:14: 0x2241ef in expect (test)
    if (!ok) return error.TestUnexpectedResult;
             ^
[...]/test_fail:5:5: 0x224305 in test.always fails (test)
    try expect(false);
    ^
0 passed; 0 skipped; 1 failed.
```

Commit message:

showcase for error union is ignored
I forgot to write "try" in my first test and this error was a bit unexpected because in other languages ​​you don't need "try/catch" for assert.

website/versioned_docs/version-0.13/00-getting-started/04-running-tests.mdx, after:

---
pagination_next: language-basics/assignment
---

import CodeBlock from "@theme/CodeBlock";

import Success from "!!raw-loader!./04.running-tests-success.zig";

# Running Tests

In this guide, code examples are often given as runnable tests. Before proceeding, make sure that you can run them successfully.

### Success

Save the following text as `test_pass.zig`, and run `zig test test_pass.zig`; you should read `All 1 tests  passed.` in your terminal.

<CodeBlock language="zig">{Success}</CodeBlock>

:::note

Some code examples in this guide will have their imports at the top hidden, make sure to get them by clicking the copy button on the top-right of the code block.

:::

Try the same test without the `try` keyword. What happened?

### Failure

Now, save the following text as `test_fail.zig` and observe it fail.

```zig
const std = @import("std");
const expect = std.testing.expect;

test "always fails" {
    try expect(false);
}
```

Which should output something like:

```
Test [1/1] test.always fails... FAIL (TestUnexpectedResult)
/usr/lib/zig/std/testing.zig:515:14: 0x2241ef in expect (test)
    if (!ok) return error.TestUnexpectedResult;
             ^
[...]/test_fail:5:5: 0x224305 in test.always fails (test)
    try expect(false);
    ^
0 passed; 0 skipped; 1 failed.
```
